Adding basic documentation for axial expansion (#2119)
terrapower/armi: doc/user/radial_and_axial_expansion.rst

Radial and Axial Expansion and Contraction
******************************************

ARMI natively supports linear expansion in both the radial and axial dimensions. These expansion
types function independently of one another and each have their own set of underlying assumptions
and use-cases. The remainder of this section is described as follows: in Section

> :ref:`thermalExpansion` the methodology used for thermal expansion within ARMI is described.

Reviewer: This sentence is weird. It looks like it is going to describe a list of things, but then just lists one single section.

Author: Oh, eww. Removed. Thanks!

Radial and Axial Expansion and Contraction
******************************************

> ARMI natively supports linear expansion in both the radial and axial dimensions. These expansion types function independently of one another and each have their own set of underlying assumptions and use-cases. The remainder of this section is described as follows: in Section :ref:`thermalExpansion` the methodology used for thermal expansion within ARMI is described.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean to have this as one long line?

Author: Well, it's on purpose, but I can change it.

My _idea_ here is that it's probably better to let Sphinx decide where line wraps should happen, and let your IDE do the wrap, then to add a bunch of carriage returns in.

It's just an idea, I'm not married to it.

Reviewer 2: Huh. Have we encountered issues with this? In many downstream projects we generally avoid the one long line approach in favor or breaking them up. I don't have a strong opinion, but would like consistency one way or another.

Author: Okay, I changed them over to shorter line lengths.

.. math::
    \rho(T_h) \frac{kg}{m^3} = \frac{\rho(T_0) \frac{kg}{m^3}}{1 + \frac{\Delta L}{L_0}} = \frac{\rho(T_0) \frac{kg}{m^3}}{(1 + \alpha_m (T_h) (T_h - T_0))^3}

where, :math:`\rho(T_h)` is the component density at the given temperature :math:`T_h`, :math:`\rho(T_0)` is the component density at the reference temperature :math:`T_0`, and :math:`\alpha(T_h)` is the mean coefficient of thermal expansion at the specified temperature :math:`T_h` relative to the material's reference temperature.

An update to mass densities is applied for all solid components given the assumption of isotropic thermal expansion.  Here we assume the masses of non-solid components (e.g., fluids or gases) are allowed to change within the reactor core model based on changes to solid volume changes. For instance, if solids change volume due to temperature changes, there is a change in the amount of volume left for fluid components.

Implementation Discussion and Example of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion
===========================================================================

> This section provides an example thermal expansion calculation for a simple cylindrical component in the following figure:
> 
> .. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_simple.png
> 
>     Illustration of Simple Cylinder Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion
> 
> from a reference temperature of 20°C to 1000°C with example material properties and dimensions as shown in this table:
> 
> .. list-table:: Example Component Properties for Thermal Expansion
>    :widths: 50 50
>    :header-rows: 1
> 
>    * - Property
>      - Example
>    * - Material
>      - Steel
>    * - Radius
>      - 0.25 cm
>    * - Height
>      - 5.0 cm
>    * - Reference Temperature
>      - 20°C
>    * - Density
>      - 1.0 g/cc
>    * - Mean Coefficient Thermal Expansion
>      - 2 x 10-6 1/°C

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section provides an example thermal expansion calculation for a simple cylindrical component from a reference temperature of 20°C to 1000°C with example material properties and dimensions as shown in Table :numref:`thermal_exp_comp_properties`.

.. list-table:: Example Component Properties for Thermal Expansion
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1
   :name: thermal_exp_comp_properties

   * - Property
     - Example
   * - Material
     - Steel
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
   * - Reference Temperature
     - 20°C
   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
   * - Mean Coefficient Thermal Expansion
     - 2 x 10-6 1/°C

Figure :numref:`therm_exp_illustration` illustrates the thermal expansion phenomena in both the radial and axial directions.

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_simple.png
   :name: therm_exp_illustration

    Illustration of radial (isotopic) and axial thermal expansion for a cylinder in ARMI.
```

> This process is performed iteratively for each component as temperatures change. One important note about the thermal expansion implementation is that components are constrained within blocks, so the height of the component is determined by the height of its parent Block. What follows is a simple example illustrating the behavior of thermal expansion for a Block containing a single Component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thermal expansion calculations are performed for each component in the ARMI reactor data model as component temperatures change. Since components are constrained within blocks, the height of components are determined by the height of their parent block. :numref:`hot_radius` through :nuref:`hot_density` illustrate how the radius, height, volume, density, and mass are updated for a component during thermal expansion.
```

.. list-table:: Example Calculation of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion for a Cylindrical Component
   :widths: 33 33 33
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Component Temperature
     - 20°C
     - 1000°C
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
     - 0.251 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
     - 5.01 cm
   * - Volume
     - 0.982 :math:`cm^3`
     -  0.988 :math:`cm^3`
   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
     - 0.994 g/cc
   * - Mass
     - 0.982 g
     - 0.982 g

> .. math::
>     \vec{r} = 0.25 cm \cdot (1 + (2 x 10^-6 \frac{1}{°C})(1000°C − 20°C)) = 0.251 cm
> 
> .. math::
>     \vec{r} = 5.0 cm \cdot (1 + (2 x 10^-6 \frac{1}{°C})(1000°C − 20°C)) = 5.01 cm
> 
> .. math::
>     \vec{V} = \pi \cdot (0.251 cm)^2 \cdot 5.01 cm = 0.988 cm^3
> 
> .. math::
>     \vec{\rho} = \frac{1.0 \frac{g}{cc}}{(1 + (2 x 10^-6 \frac{1}{°C})(1000°C − 20°C))} = 0.994 \frac{g}{cc}
> 
> .. math::
>     \vec{m} = 0.994 \frac{g}{cc} \cdot 0.988 cm^3 = 0.982 g

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. math::
   :name: hot_radius

    r(T_h) = 0.25 \left(1 + \left(2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right) = 0.251 cm

.. math::
   :name: hot_height

    h(T_h) = 5.0 \left(1 + (2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right) = 5.01 cm

.. math::
   :name: hot_volume
   
    V(T_h) = \pi (0.251)^2 5.01 = 0.988 cm^3

.. math::
   :name: hot_density

    \rho(T_h) = \frac{1.0}{\left(1 + 2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)} = 0.994 \frac{g}{cc}

.. math::
   :name: hot_mass

    m(T_h) = 0.994 \times 0.988  = 0.982 g
```

> When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven by a target Component (e.g., fuel). The target is selected to ensure some Parameter of interest (e.g., linear heat generation rate) is evaluate correctly. In this case, the height of the Block containing the multiple components is only expanded to meet the axial expansion of the target Component and the remaining solid components have their densities further adjusted to preserve mass within the Assembly.

Reviewer 2: we should try and get consistency between Component / component and Block / block.

> When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven by a target Component (e.g., fuel). The target is selected to ensure some Parameter of interest (e.g., linear heat generation rate) is evaluate correctly. In this case, the height of the Block containing the multiple components is only expanded to meet the axial expansion of the target Component and the remaining solid components have their densities further adjusted to preserve mass within the Assembly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven by an axial expansion "target Component" (e.g., fuel). This target is selected (either automatically based on component flags or manually in the blueprints) to ensure that specific component has its mass conserved post-expansion. Note, the remaining components also have their mass conserved on the assembly-level; however intra-block mass conservation is lost as there is a redistribution of mass between blocks for non-target components.
```

> Radial thermal expansion occurs for each component in the Block and mechanical contact of components is not accounted for, meaning that the radial expansion of one Component is independent from the radial expansion of the others. Solid components are linked to gas/fluid components (i.e., sodium bond, helium) and the gas/fluid area is allowed to expand and contract with changes in Component temperatures. Alternatively, the axial thermal expansion of a Block within an Assembly does influence other Block positions. Blocks are dynamically linked in the axial direction. So, while axial thermal expansion evaluations of each Block are treated independently, the axial mesh points are updated to account for the physical material displacements across the entire assembly length

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Radial thermal expansion occurs for each component in a given block. Mechanical contact between components is not accounted for, meaning that the radial expansion of one Component is independent from the radial expansion of the others. Solid components may be linked to gas/fluid components (i.e., sodium bond, helium) and the gas/fluid area is allowed to expand and contract with changes in Component temperatures. Alternatively, the axial thermal expansion of components within a Block do influence the positions of components in neighboring blocks for a given Assembly. So, while axial thermal expansion evaluations of each Block are treated independently, the axial mesh points are updated to account for the physical material displacements across the entire assembly length.
```

The following two tables provide illustrations of the axial thermal expansion process for an example core assembly. In this example there are four main block types defined: Shield, Fuel, Plenum, and Dummy.

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_components.png

    Illustration of Components for Axial Thermal Expansion Process

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_process.png

    Simplified Illustration of Axial Thermal Expansion Process for a Core Assembly

The target components for each Block type are provided in the following table:

.. list-table:: : Example Assignment of Target Components within Blocks
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Block
     - Target Component 
   * - Shield
     - Shield
   * - Fuel
     - Fuel
   * - Plenum
     - Clad
   * - Dummy
     - N/A

The axial thermal expansion algorithm is applied in four steps:

> * Step 1: Expand the axial dimensions of target components and non-target components within each block independently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Step 1: Expand the axial dimensions of target component and non-target components within each block independently.
```

* Step 2: Align blocks axially such that common components have consistent alignments (e.g., overlapping radial dimensions).
* Step 3: Assign the block lower and upper elevations to account for the thermal expansion of blocks below each block.
  * Step 3a: Create new mesh lines that track the target component.

> * Step 4: Adjust the “Dummy” block located at the top of the core assembly to maintain a consistent core assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Step 4: Adjust the "Dummy" block located at the top of the assembly to maintain a consistent core-wide assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.
```

where, :math:`\rho(T_h)` is the component density in :math:`\frac{kg}{m^3}` at the given temperature
:math:`T_h`, :math:`\rho(T_0)` is the component density in :math:`\frac{kg}{m^3}` at the reference
temperature :math:`T_0`, and :math:`\alpha(T_h)` is the mean coefficient of thermal expansion at the
specified temperature :math:`T_h` relative to the material's reference temperature.

An update to mass densities is applied for all solid components given the assumption of isotropic
thermal expansion.  Here we assume the masses of non-solid components (e.g., fluids or gases) are
allowed to change within the reactor core model based on changes to solid volume changes. For
instance, if solids change volume due to temperature changes, there is a change in the amount of
volume left for fluid components.

Implementation Discussion and Example of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion
===========================================================================

This section provides an example thermal expansion calculation for a simple cylindrical component
from a reference temperature of 20°C to 1000°C with example material properties and dimensions as

> shown in Table :numref:`thermal_exp_comp_properties`.

Reviewer 2: The `:numref:` cross-references aren't compiling quite right in the HTML nor PDF... I wonder if this is a custom configuration we have downstream that I've just taken for granted here....

Author: Removed

.. list-table:: Example Component Properties for Thermal Expansion
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1
   :name: thermal_exp_comp_properties

   * - Property
     - Example
   * - Material
     - Steel
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
   * - Reference Temperature
     - 20°C
   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
   * - Mean Coefficient Thermal Expansion
     - 2 x 10-6 1/°C

Figure :numref:`therm_exp_illustration` illustrates the thermal expansion phenomena in both the
radial and axial directions.

> .. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_simple.png

Reviewer 2: Looking at the PDF and HTML, this is a comically large figure lol. Can we add `:scale: 60` or something to get it to be a better size?

Author: try now

Reviewer 2: Still kinda huge imo. And the Figure caption isn't showing 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/15468d04-e3fa-4573-b329-4e9315762810)

Author: Updated

Author: @albeanth Okay, the figure all look fine sized to me now. And the labels are all working.

Tell me what you think.

   :name: therm_exp_illustration

>     Illustration of radial (isotopic) and axial thermal expansion for a cylinder in ARMI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Illustration of radial (isotropic) and axial thermal expansion for a cylinder in ARMI.
```

Thermal expansion calculations are performed for each component in the ARMI reactor data model as
component temperatures change. Since components are constrained within blocks, the height of
components are determined by the height of their parent block. :numref:`hot_radius` through

> :nuref:`hot_density` illustrate how the radius, height, volume, density, and mass are updated for a

Reviewer 2: more broken `:numref:`, sorry @john-science !

Author: Removed

> component during thermal expansion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
component during thermal expansion, respectively.
```

.. list-table:: Example Calculation of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion for a Cylindrical Component
   :widths: 33 33 33
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Component Temperature
     - 20°C
     - 1000°C
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
     - 0.251 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
     - 5.01 cm
   * - Volume

>      - 0.982 :math:`cm^3`
>      -  0.988 :math:`cm^3`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - 0.982 cc
     - 0.988 cc
```

   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
     - 0.994 g/cc
   * - Mass
     - 0.982 g
     - 0.982 g

.. math::
   :name: hot_radius

>     r(T_h) = 0.25 \left(1 + \left(2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right) = 0.251 cm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    r(T_h) = 0.25 \left(1 + \left(2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)\right) = 0.251 cm
```

.. math::
   :name: hot_height

>     h(T_h) = 5.0 \left(1 + (2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right) = 5.01 cm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    h(T_h) = 5.0 \left(1 + \left((2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)\right) = 5.01 cm
```

.. math::
   :name: hot_volume
   
    V(T_h) = \pi (0.251)^2 5.01 = 0.988 cm^3

.. math::
   :name: hot_density

    \rho(T_h) = \frac{1.0}{\left(1 + 2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)} = 0.994 \frac{g}{cc}

.. math::
   :name: hot_mass

    m(T_h) = 0.994 \times 0.988  = 0.982 g

When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven
by an axial expansion "target Component" (e.g., fuel). This target is selected (either automatically

> based on component flags or manually in the blueprints) to ensure that specific component has its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
based on component flags or manually in the blueprints) to ensure that a specific component has its
```

mass conserved post-expansion. Note, the remaining components also have their mass conserved on the
assembly-level; however intra-block mass conservation is lost as there is a redistribution of mass

> between blocks for non-target components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
between axially neighboring blocks for non-target components.
```

Radial thermal expansion occurs for each component in a given block. Mechanical contact between
components is not accounted for, meaning that the radial expansion of one Component is independent
from the radial expansion of the others. Solid components may be linked to gas/fluid components
(i.e., sodium bond, helium) and the gas/fluid area is allowed to expand and contract with changes in

> Component temperatures. Alternatively, the axial thermal expansion of components within a Block do

Reviewer 2: The text flow is odd here. We're talking about axial thermal expansion and then all of a sudden there is these 3 sentences on radial expansion. What do you think about moving these three sentences up to right after Equation `hot_mass`? That would then have a logic that is something like:

1. problem/illustration set up
2. radial expansion
3. axial expansion

Author: Hmmm

That IS odd. Okay, well, I made your update.

Sorry about that.

influence the positions of components in neighboring blocks for a given Assembly. So, while axial
thermal expansion evaluations of each Block are treated independently, the axial mesh points are
updated to account for the physical material displacements across the entire assembly length.

The following two tables provide illustrations of the axial thermal expansion process for an example
core assembly. In this example there are four main block types defined: Shield, Fuel, Plenum, and
Dummy.

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_components.png

    Illustration of Components for Axial Thermal Expansion Process

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_process.png

>     Simplified Illustration of Axial Thermal Expansion Process for a Core Assembly

Reviewer 2: more odd scaling here for these figures. The first is 'yuge'. The second is ok, I think.

Author: try now

The target components for each Block type are provided in the following table:

> .. list-table:: : Example Assignment of Target Components within Blocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. list-table:: Example Assignment of Target Components within Blocks
```

   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Block
     - Target Component 
   * - Shield
     - Shield
   * - Fuel
     - Fuel
   * - Plenum
     - Clad
   * - Dummy
     - N/A

The axial thermal expansion algorithm is applied in four steps:

> * Step 1: Expand the axial dimensions of target component and non-target components within each
>   block independently. 
> * Step 2: Align blocks axially such that common components have consistent alignments (e.g.,
>   overlapping radial dimensions).
> * Step 3: Assign the block lower and upper elevations to account for the thermal expansion of blocks
>   below each block.
>   * Step 3a: Create new mesh lines that track the target component.
> * Step 4: Adjust the "Dummy" block located at the top of the assembly to maintain a consistent
>   core-wide assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Expand the axial dimensions of target component and non-target components within each
  block independently. 
# Align blocks axially such that common components have consistent alignments (e.g.,
  overlapping radial dimensions).
# Assign the block lower and upper elevations to account for the thermal expansion of blocks
  below each block.

   #  Create new mesh lines that track the target component.

# Adjust the "Dummy" block located at the top of the assembly to maintain a consistent
  core-wide assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.
```
This should (hopefully) create better nested numbered lists.

   * - Component Temperature
     - 20°C
     - 1000°C
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
     - 0.251 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
     - 5.01 cm
   * - Volume
     - 0.982 cc
     - 0.988 cc
   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
     - 0.994 g/cc
   * - Mass
     - 0.982 g
     - 0.982 g

.. math::
   :name: hot_radius

    r(T_h) = 0.25 \left(1 + \left(2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)\right) = 0.251 cm

.. math::
   :name: hot_height

    h(T_h) = 5.0 \left(1 + \left((2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)\right) = 5.01 cm

.. math::
   :name: hot_volume
   
    V(T_h) = \pi (0.251)^2 5.01 = 0.988 cm^3

.. math::
   :name: hot_density

    \rho(T_h) = \frac{1.0}{\left(1 + 2\times 10^{-6}(1000 − 20)\right)} = 0.994 \frac{g}{cc}

.. math::
   :name: hot_mass

    m(T_h) = 0.994 \times 0.988 = 0.982 g

Radial thermal expansion occurs for each component in a given block. Mechanical contact between
components is not accounted for, meaning that the radial expansion of one Component is independent
from the radial expansion of the others. Solid components may be linked to gas/fluid components
(i.e., sodium bond, helium) and the gas/fluid area is allowed to expand and contract with changes in

> Component temperatures. 

Reviewer: This may be a good time to mention that void components are allowed to have negative areas in cases where the expansion of two solid components overlap with each other.

Author: Done.

When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven
by an axial expansion "target Component" (e.g., fuel). This target is selected (either automatically
based on component flags or manually in the blueprints) to ensure that a specific component has its
mass conserved post-expansion. Note, the remaining components also have their mass conserved on the

> assembly-level; however intra-block mass conservation is lost as there is a redistribution of mass

Reviewer: I believe that this sentence about mass conservation on the assembly level is not true. The mass of non-target components will change in the top-most non-dummy block, because the non-target components will be expanded to the same height as the target component.

Reviewer 2: I think this depends on what the top most block is. If the top most (non-dummy) block is a single solid component, you'll conserve just fine. But if there are multiple solid components, you are right.

In reality, in order to conserve mass, the blueprints need to be set up \*just\* right. Thus the reason for the `detailedAxialExpansion` [blueprints](https://github.com/terrapower/armi/tree/main/armi/tests/detailedAxialExpansion). The axial expansion functionality definitely, without a doubt, will not conserve mass for all set ups.

in length, :math:`L_h - L_c`, relative to the non-reference temperature,

.. math::
    \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_c} &= \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_0} \frac{L_0}{L_c}\\
    &= \left( \frac{L_h}{L_0} - \frac{L_c}{L_0} \right) \left( 1 + \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right) \right)^{-1}.
    :label: expNewRelative

Using Equations :eq:`hotExp` and :eq:`nonRefExp`, we can simplify Equation :eq:`expNewRelative` to find,

.. math::
    \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_c} = \frac{\alpha(T_h) \left(T_h - T_0\right) - \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right)}{1 + \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right)}.
    :label: linearExpansionFactor

Equation :eq:`linearExpansionFactor` is the expression used by ARMI in
:py:meth:`linearExpansionFactor <armi.materials.material.Material.linearExpansionFactor>`.

.. note::
    :py:meth:`linearExpansionPercent
    <armi.materials.material.Material.linearExpansionPercent>` returns
    :math:`\frac{L - L_0}{L_0}` in %.

Given that thermal expansion (or contraction) of solid components must conserve mass throughout the
system, the density of the component is adjusted as a function of temperature based on Equation

> :eq:`hot_density`, assuming isotropic thermal expansion.
> 
> .. math::
>     \rho(T_h) = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \frac{\Delta L}{L_0}\right)^3} = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \alpha_m (T_h) (T_h - T_0)\right)^3}
>     :label: hot_density

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:eq:`hot_density_general`, assuming isotropic thermal expansion.

.. math::
    \rho(T_h) = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \frac{\Delta L}{L_0}\right)^3} = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \alpha_m (T_h) (T_h - T_0)\right)^3}
    :label: hot_density_general
```
otherwise it refs the wrong equation. my bad on the poor suggested change! 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/15ec50ec-67ab-4e78-b476-23c99f61e3a9)

Author: OH, nice catch man, thanks.

I guess I was too focused on the latex.

Mass Conservation
-----------------
Due to the requirement that all components within a Block be the same height, the conservation of
mass post-axial expansion is not trivial. At the Block-level, the axial expansion target component
is guaranteed to have its mass conserved post-axial expansion. For pinned-blocks, this is typically
chosen to be the most neutronically important component; e.g., in a fuel Block this is typically the
Fuel component. All other components, assuming they expand at a different rate than the fuel, will
exhibit non-conservation on the Block-level as mass is redistributed across the axially-neighboring
blocks. However, the mass of all solid components at the assembly-level are designed to be conserved
if the following are met for a given assembly design.

#. Axial continuity of like-objects. E.g., pins, clad, etc.
#. Components that may expand at different rates axially terminate in unique blocks

   #. E.g., the clad extends above the termination of the fuel and the radial duct encasing an
      assembly extends past the termination of the clad.

#. The top-most Block must be a "dummy Block" containing fluid (typically coolant).

> See :py:module:`armi.tests.detailedAxialExansion` for an example blueprint which satisfy the above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :py:module:`armi.tests.detailedAxialExpansion` for an example blueprint which satisfy the above
```
otherwise, broken link
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f167dd56-c555-4739-a360-545b147d575b)

Implementation Discussion and Example of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion
===========================================================================
This section provides an example thermal expansion calculation for a simple cylindrical component
from a reference temperature of 20°C to 1000°C with example material properties and dimensions as
shown in the table below.

.. list-table:: Example Component Properties for Thermal Expansion
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1
   :name: thermal_exp_comp_properties

   * - Property
     - Example
   * - Material
     - Steel
   * - Radius
     - 0.25 cm
   * - Height
     - 5.0 cm
   * - Reference Temperature
     - 20°C
   * - Density
     - 1.0 g/cc
   * - Mean Coefficient Thermal Expansion
     - 2 x 10-6 1/°C

The figure below illustrates the thermal expansion phenomena in both the radial and axial
directions.

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_simple.png

    Illustration of radial and axial thermal expansion for a cylinder in ARMI.

Thermal expansion calculations are performed for each component in the ARMI reactor data model as
component temperatures change. Since components are constrained within blocks, the height of

> components are determined by the height of their parent block. The equations below for
> :eq:`hot_radius` through :eq:`hot_density` illustrate how the radius, height, volume, density, and mass
> are updated for a component during thermal expansion, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
components are determined by the height of their parent block. Equations :eq:`hot_radius` through 
:eq:`hot_density` illustrate how the radius, height, volume, density, and mass are updated for 
a component during thermal expansion, respectively.
```

    \end{aligned}
    :label: diffHotNonRef

Using Equations :eq:`diffHotNonRef` and :eq:`nonRefExp`, we can obtain an expression for the change
in length, :math:`L_h - L_c`, relative to the non-reference temperature,

.. math::
    \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_c} &= \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_0} \frac{L_0}{L_c}\\
    &= \left( \frac{L_h}{L_0} - \frac{L_c}{L_0} \right) \left( 1 + \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right) \right)^{-1}.
    :label: expNewRelative

Using Equations :eq:`hotExp` and :eq:`nonRefExp`, we can simplify Equation :eq:`expNewRelative` to find,

.. math::
    \frac{L_h - L_c}{L_c} = \frac{\alpha(T_h) \left(T_h - T_0\right) - \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right)}{1 + \alpha(T_c)\left(T_c - T_0\right)}.
    :label: linearExpansionFactor

Equation :eq:`linearExpansionFactor` is the expression used by ARMI in
:py:meth:`linearExpansionFactor <armi.materials.material.Material.linearExpansionFactor>`.

.. note::
    :py:meth:`linearExpansionPercent
    <armi.materials.material.Material.linearExpansionPercent>` returns
    :math:`\frac{L - L_0}{L_0}` in %.

Given that thermal expansion (or contraction) of solid components must conserve mass throughout the

> system, the density of the component is adjusted as a function of temperature based on the following
> equation, assuming isotropic thermal expansion.
> 
> .. math::
>     \rho(T_h) = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \frac{\Delta L}{L_0}\right)^3} = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \alpha_m (T_h) (T_h - T_0)\right)^3}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
system, the density of the component is adjusted as a function of temperature based on Equation
:eq:`hot_density`, assuming isotropic thermal expansion.

.. math::
    \rho(T_h) = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \frac{\Delta L}{L_0}\right)^3} = \frac{\rho(T_0)}{\left(1 + \alpha_m (T_h) (T_h - T_0)\right)^3}
    :label: hot_density
```
Otherwise an equation label doesn't show and the inconsistency is less than great imo.

where, :math:`\rho(T_h)` is the component density in :math:`\frac{kg}{m^3}` at the given temperature
:math:`T_h`, :math:`\rho(T_0)` is the component density in :math:`\frac{kg}{m^3}` at the reference
temperature :math:`T_0`, and :math:`\alpha(T_h)` is the mean coefficient of thermal expansion at the
specified temperature :math:`T_h` relative to the material's reference temperature.

An update to mass densities is applied for all solid components given the assumption of isotropic
thermal expansion. Here we assume the masses of non-solid components (e.g., fluids or gases) are
allowed to change within the reactor core model based on changes to solid volume changes. For
instance, if solids change volume due to temperature changes, there is a change in the amount of
volume left for fluid components.

Implementation Discussion and Example of Radial and Axial Thermal Expansion
===========================================================================
This section provides an example thermal expansion calculation for a simple cylindrical component
from a reference temperature of 20°C to 1000°C with example material properties and dimensions as
shown in the table below.

> .. list-table:: Example Component Properties for Thermal Expansion

Reviewer 2: These tables show up strangely small in the HTML. They look fine in the PDF. Up to you if you want to address it. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/114ff244-2910-43bc-8ec2-97f9d6a62a64)

Author: It's a small table. I'm fine with that.

components within a Block influences the positions of components in axially neighboring blocks for a given
Assembly. So, while axial thermal expansion evaluations of each Block are treated independently, the
axial mesh points are updated to account for the physical material displacements across the entire
assembly length.

The following two tables provide illustrations of the axial thermal expansion process for an example
core assembly. In this example there are four main block types defined: Shield, Fuel, Plenum, and
Dummy.

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_components.png
   :scale: 60%

    Illustration of Components for Axial Thermal Expansion Process

.. figure:: /.static/axial_expansion_process.png

    Simplified Illustration of Axial Thermal Expansion Process for a Core Assembly

The target components for each Block type are provided in the following table:

.. list-table:: Example Assignment of Target Components within Blocks
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Block
     - Target Component 
   * - Shield
     - Shield
   * - Fuel
     - Fuel
   * - Plenum
     - Clad
   * - Dummy
     - N/A

The axial thermal expansion algorithm is applied in four steps:

> # Expand the axial dimensions of target component and non-target components within each
>   block independently. 
> # Align blocks axially such that common components have consistent alignments (e.g.,
>   overlapping radial dimensions).
> # Assign the block lower and upper elevations to account for the thermal expansion of blocks
>   below each block.
> 
>    #  Create new mesh lines that track the target component.
> 
> # Adjust the "Dummy" block located at the top of the assembly to maintain a consistent
>   core-wide assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Expand the axial dimensions of target component and non-target components within each
  block independently. 
#. Align blocks axially such that common components have consistent alignments (e.g.,
  overlapping radial dimensions).
#. Assign the block lower and upper elevations to account for the thermal expansion of blocks
  below each block.

   #.  Create new mesh lines that track the target component.

#. Adjust the "Dummy" block located at the top of the assembly to maintain a consistent
  core-wide assembly height before and after axial thermal expansion is applied.
```
This should fix this
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/25937847-1ff1-4355-b146-4e1bfcd31dd8)

   solid components, and therefore do not have an axial expansion target component.

Mass Conservation
-----------------
Due to the requirement that all components within a Block be the same height, the conservation of
mass post-axial expansion is not trivial. At the Block-level, the axial expansion target component
is guaranteed to have its mass conserved post-axial expansion. For pinned-blocks, this is typically
chosen to be the most neutronically important component; e.g., in a fuel Block this is typically the
Fuel component. All other components, assuming they expand at a different rate than the fuel, will
exhibit non-conservation on the Block-level as mass is redistributed across the axially-neighboring
blocks. However, the mass of all solid components at the assembly-level are designed to be conserved
if the following are met for a given assembly design.

#. Axial continuity of like-objects. E.g., pins, clad, etc.
#. Components that may expand at different rates axially terminate in unique blocks

   #. E.g., the clad extends above the termination of the fuel and the radial duct encasing an

>       assembly extends past the termination of the clad.

Reviewer 2: Hmmmm this isn't compiling right. I expected this to be 2 and 2a.... 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e57e550a-240b-4975-945a-5229243c4acd)

> #. The top-most Block must be a "dummy Block" containing fluid (typically coolant).

Reviewer 2: These aren't compiling right in either the HTML or the PDF. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05547634-7f96-4302-9edb-6dda0f91fbbf)

in cases where the expansion of two solid components overlap each other.

When two or more components exist within the Block, the overall height change of the Block is driven
by an axial expansion "target Component" (e.g., fuel). Alternatively, the axial thermal expansion of
components within a Block do influence the positions of components in neighboring blocks for a given
Assembly. So, while axial thermal expansion evaluations of each Block are treated independently, the
axial mesh points are updated to account for the physical material displacements across the entire
assembly length.

To properly model the thermal axial expansion, it is necessary for ARMI to know the target
component in each Block that drives the expansion of the Block as a whole and is guaranteed to
preserve mass between temperature states. It is necessary to manually specify the target components
in each Block using the ``axial expansion target component`` block blueprint attribute. The target
Component in each Block is assigned according to the following ordered precedent, where the target
Component can be any Component of that material:

1. fuel components
2. absorber components
3. steel components

> 4. any remaining component

Reviewer: Delete this. This discussion of the ordered precedent is related to my calculation, not a generic ARMI  implementation.

Thus, in fuel blocks the first fuel Component will be the axial expansion target component and will
preserve fuel mass globally over the reactor and will lead to a slight reduction of the steel mass
as the temperature increases. The steel mass reduction will take place as temperature increases. The
steel mass reduction will take place due to the way ARMI handles thermal expansion, using the target
Component to determine the height of the entire block and adjusting all the components in that block
to have the same new height while densities are kept at the values corresponding to the current
temperature. Since steel has a stronger thermal expansion coeficient than does fuel, the steel
components should in fact expand more than the fuel in real life, but in the ARMI model the steel
components are restricted to expanding only as high as the target component (fuel). In this model,

> this will manifest in some amount of steel being chopped off at the top of the fuel stack.

Reviewer: This content that I gave to you was supposed to just be an example. It is a specific instance of a situation where mass will not be conserved, not a generic occurrence, and we should not enshrine this in the ARMI docs.

We should talk more about what to include here instead.
